.\"Copyright (c) 2024, Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo <DtxdF@disroot.org>
.\"All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\"modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\"* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
.\"  list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\"* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
.\"  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
.\"  and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"* Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its
.\"  contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"  this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\"THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\"AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\"IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\"DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\"FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\"DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\"SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\"CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\"OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\"OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd July 1, 2024
.Dt LITTLEJET 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm littlejet
.Nd Create, deploy, manage and scale FreeBSD jails anywhere
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Cm usage
.Nm
.Cm version
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm add-label
.Ar project
.Ar node
.Ar label Ns = Ns Ar value No "..."
.Nm
.Cm del-label
.Ar project
.Ar node
.Ar label
.Nm
.Cm del-labels
.Ar project
.Ar node
.Nm
.Cm get-label
.Ar project
.Ar node
.Ar label
.Nm
.Cm get-labels
.Ar project
.Ar node
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm add-node
.Op Fl T
.Ar project
.Ar node
.Nm
.Cm copy-nodes
.Op Fl O
.Ar src-project
.Ar dst-project
.Op Ar node
.Nm
.Cm del-node
.Ar project
.Ar node
.Nm
.Cm del-nodes
.Ar project
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm copy
.Op Fl fN
.Ar project
.Ar new-project
.Nm
.Cm create
.Op Fl f
.Ar project
.Op Ar director-file
.Nm
.Cm destroy
.Ar project
.Nm
.Cm get-nodes
.Ar project
.Nm
.Cm get-projects
.Nm
.Cm rename
.Ar project
.Ar new-project
.Nm
.Cm show
.Op Ar project
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm run-appjail
.Op Fl CHPs
.Op Fl p Ar project
.Op Fl n Ar node
.Ar appjail-command
.Op Ar args No "..."
.Nm
.Cm run-cmd
.Op Fl CHPs
.Op Fl p Ar project
.Op Fl n Ar node
.Ar command
.Op Ar args No "..."
.Nm
.Cm run-director
.Op Fl CHPs
.Op Fl p Ar project
.Op Fl n Ar node
.Ar director-command
.Op Ar args No "..."
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm run-script
.Op Fl p Ar project
.Ar run-script
.Op Ar args No "..."
.Nm
.Cm schedule
.Ar lock-file
.Ar args No "..."
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm set-director
.Ar project
.Ar director-file
.Nm
.Cm set-env
.Ar project
.Ar env-file
.Pp
.Sh DESCRIPTION
LittleJet is an open source, easy-to-use orchestrator for managing, deploying,
scaling and interconnecting FreeBSD jails anywhere in the world.
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xxx -compact
.It Cm usage
Display usage message and exit.
.Pp
.It Cm version
Display version information about LittleJet.
.Pp
.It Cm add-label Ar project Ar node Ar label Ns = Ns Ar value No "..."
Add a new label to an existing project node.
.Pp
.It Cm del-label Ar project Ar node Ar label
Delete an existing label from the given project node.
.Pp
.It Cm del-labels Ar project Ar node
Delete all labels from the given project node.
.Pp
.It Cm get-label Ar project Ar node Ar label
Get the label value from the project node.
.Pp
.It Cm get-labels Ar project Ar node
Get all labels from the project node.
.Pp
.It Cm add-node Oo Fl T Oc Ar project Ar node
Add a new
.Ar node
to
.Ar project Ns "."
By default, this subcommand connects to the node and runs the
.Xr true 1
command to check if everything is OK unless the
.Fl T
flag is set.
.Pp
.It Cm copy-nodes Oo Fl O Oc Ar src-project Ar dst-project Oo Ar node Oc
Copy nodes from
.Ar src-project
to
.Ar dst-project Ns "."
.Pp
If the
.Fl O
flag is set, nodes in
.Ar dst-project
are deleted first before nodes in
.Ar src-project
are copied.
.Pp
If a
.Ar node
is specified, it is only copied instead of all nodes.
.Pp
.It Cm del-node Ar project Ar node
Remove
.Ar node
from
.Ar project Ns "."
This also destroys the project remotely.
.Pp
.It Cm del-nodes Ar project
Like
.Cm del-node
but for each node of
.Ar project Ns "."
.Pp
.It Cm copy Oo Fl fN Oc Ar project Ar new-project
Copy
.Ar project
as
.Ar new-project Ns "."
.Pp
By default, nodes are copied unless the
.Fl N
flag is set.
.Pp
If the
.Fl f
flag is set and
.Ar new-project
exists, it will be overwritten.
.Pp
.It Cm create Oo Fl f Oc Ar project Oo Ar director-file Oc
Create a new project.
.Pp
This subcommand first determines the directory of the Director file and makes a 
complete copy. That new copy is the new project directory. By default, the Director
file is 
.Do Pa appjail-director.yml Dc Ns ,
assuming one exists in the current working directory.
.Pp
An error is returned if the project to be created exists unless
.Fl f
is set.
.Pp
.It Cm destroy Ar project
Destroys the nodes of the given project and the project itself. It will destroy
the project remotely on each node, which means that all its jails will be
destroyed.
.Pp
Note that this subcommand will attempt to destroy jails, but if the current jail
fails to be stopped or destroyed, this subcommand continues without problems and
ignores those jails.
.Pp
.It Cm get-nodes Ar project
Get a list of the current nodes for the given project.
.Pp
.It Cm get-projects
Get a list of current projects.
.Pp
.It Cm rename Ar project Ar new-project
Rename a project.
.Pp
Technically, this subcommand first copies
.Ar project
as
.Ar new-project
and then copies the nodes of
.Ar project Ns "."
Once these operations are completed,
.Ar project
is removed.
.Pp
.It Cm show Oo Ar project Oc
Displays information about
.Ar project
or all projects if none are specified.
.Pp
.It Cm run-appjail Oo Fl CHPs Oc Oo Fl p Ar project Oc Oo Fl n Ar node Oc Ar appjail-command Oo Ar args No "..." Oc
.It Cm run-cmd Oo Fl CHPs Oc Oo Fl p Ar project Oc Oo Fl n Ar node Oc Ar command Oo Ar args No "..." Oc
.It Cm run-director Oo Fl CHPs Oc Oo Fl p Ar project Oc Oo Fl n Ar node Oc Ar director-command Oo Ar args No "..." Oc
Run an
.Xr appjail 1
subcommand with
.Cm run-appjail Ns ,
a Director subcommand with
.Cm run-director Ns ,
or simply a shell command on the remote system with
.Cm run-cmd Ns "."
.Pp
If
.Fl p
and
.Fl n
are not set, the given command is executed on each node in each project.
.Pp
For each execution of the
.Cm run-director
subcommand, it sets the
.Ev DIRECTOR_PROJECT
and
.Ev LITTLEJET_NODE
environment variables.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xx
.It Fl C
Since the
.Xr ssh 1 Ns "'s"
.Fl t
flag is set, the output will be altered, so
.Xr sansi 1
is used to remove those control characters.
.Pp
Note that this command must put stdout/stderr into a buffer before displaying it.
.It Fl H
By default, a header is displayed to see where the next host should execute the
given command, unless this flag is set.
.It Fl P
The given command is executed linearly on each node, but with this flag it is executed
in parallel on each node. This flag is meaningless when the
.Fl p
and
.Fl n
parameters are set since the given command is executed as if this flag were not set.
.It Fl s
Exits without success when the given command fails. This only makes sense when the
.Fl P
flag is not set.
.Pp
Note that this command must put stdout/stderr into a buffer before displaying it.
.It Fl p Ar project
Run the given command in the given project. If the
.Fl n
parameter is not set, the command is run on each node in this project.
.It Fl n Ar node
Run the given command on the given node. If the
.Fl p
parameter is not set, the command is executed in each project but using this node.
.El
.Pp
.It Cm run-script Oo Fl p Ar project Oc Ar run-script Oo Ar args No "..." Oc
Run the given RunScript on all projects or on the specific project if
.Fl p
is set.
.Pp
.It Cm schedule Ar lock-file Ar args No "..."
If there is another process locking
.Ar lock-file Ns ,
this subcommand will exit immediately and successfully. This subcommand is very
useful when run with a tool like
.Xr cron 8 Ns "."
.Pp
.It Cm set-director Ar project Ar director-file
Set a new Director file by overwriting an existing one in the project directory.
.Pp
.It Cm set-env Ar project Ar env-file
Copy new environment file by overwriting an existing one in the project directory.
.El
.Sh RUNSCRIPTS
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Cm deploy.all
Deploy the project to all nodes.
.It Cm deploy.each
For each run, deploy to any of the nodes.
.It Cm deploy.once
Deploy a project to a node if it is not already deployed to any of them.
.It Cm deploy.random
Deploy a project to a randomly chosen node.
.It Cm deploy.scale Oo Fl m Ar min Oc Oo Fl M Ar max Oc Oo Fl r Ar rctl-rules Oc Oo Fl S Ar number Oc Oo Fl t Ar scale-type Oc Oo Fl T Ar number Oc
Scale the project.
.Pp
Note that this RunScript can and will destroy the project regardless of the node.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xx
.It Fl m Ar min
Minimum of replicas. By default is
.Sy 1 Ns "."
.It Fl M Ar max
Maximum replicas that the project can replicate when auto-scaling. By default
is the same than the total of nodes in the given project.
.It Fl r Ar rctl-rules
Space-separated list of
.Xr rctl 8
rules. Each item is a key and value pair separated by
.Sy = Ns "."
The key is an
.Xr rctl 8
resource. You can use the suffixes described in
.Xr humanize_number 3
for resources that work with bytes and any resources with numbers without suffixes.
Regardless of whether the resource works with bytes or any other unit, the value must
be greater than
.Sy 0 Ns "."
.Pp
Note that the value is interpreted based on the scale type set by the
.Fl t
parameter.
.Pp
Each node must pre-configure
.Sy kern.racct.enable=1
in its
.Xr loader.conf 5
before using any rctl(8) rules.
.It Fl S Ar number
Stabilization window.
.Pp
After there are no more targets
.Pq projects or jails
that fail the
.Xr rctl 8
rules, this RunScript will destroy the rest of the nodes up to the minimum defined
by the
.Fl m
parameter. This parameter will sleep the current process at the given number if
it is greater than
.Sy 0
before re-performing the entire operation of this RunScript.
.Pp
The default is
.Sy 30 Ns "."
.It Fl t Ar scale-type
How the value defined by the
.Xr rctl 8
rule in the
.Fl r
parameter should be interpreted to check whether a target
.Pq project or jail
passes the test or not.
.Bl -tag -width xx
.It Cm any-jail
Fails if any of the jails have a metric greater than or equal to the limit defined
by the
.Fl r
parameter.
.Pp
This is the default.
.It Cm any-project
Fails if the metric total for all jails in the same project is greater
than or equal to the limit defined by the
.Fl r
parameter.
.It Cm average
Calculates the average of the metric for all jails in the same project and fails
if it is greater than or equal to the limit defined by the
.Fl r
parameter.
.It Cm percent-jail Ns = Ns Ar percent
Calculates the percentage of the limit defined by the
.Fl r
parameter and fails if it is greater than or equal to the current metric. For example, if you define a rule as
.Dq vmemoryuse=512m
and a percentage of
.Sy 60 Ns ,
the value will be
.Sy 307
.Po rounded Pc Ns ,
so this test fails if the current metric is greater than or equal to
.Sy 307 Ns "."
.It Cm percent-project Ns = Ns Ar percent
Like
.Cm percent-jail Ns ,
but first get the metric total for all jails in the same project.
.El
.It Fl T Ar number
After deploying to a new node due to a failed test of an
.Xr rctl 8
rule against another target
.Po project or jail Pc Ns ,
sleep up to the number defined by this parameter.
.Pp
The default is
.Sy 15 Ns "."
.El
.It Cm deploy.single Ar node
Deploy a project to the given node.
.It Cm vpn.wg.client Oo Fl j Ar jail Oc Oo Fl n Ar node Oc Oo Fl s Ar suffix Oc Oo Fl v Ar virtual-network Oc Ar vpn
Create a
.Do Connector Dc Ns ,
a jail with a VPN client connected to the VPN server that can forward packets between
a service in another jail and the VPN.
.Pp
A jail that wants to be exposed to the VPN must configure
.Sy vpn.wg.client.include.me
as one of its labels. Also required is
.Sy vpn.wg.client.from.port Ns ,
which is the port the load balancer will use to send packets. Other labels are
.Sy vpn.wg.client.target.port
which by default, when not defined, is the same as
.Sy vpn.wg.client.from.port Ns ,
and finally,
.Sy vpn.wg.client.proto Ns ,
the service protocol, which by default is
.Sy tcp Ns "."
.Pp
You must first deploy the VPN server using the RunScript
.Sy vpn.wg.server Ns .
After deployment,
.Ar vpn
should point to that node. This RunScript also does not include the project even
if you pass an existing one, but it is recommended to pass at least one non-existent
project as
.Sy ignore
at least so as not to execute this RunScript several times up to the total number
of projects that the manager has.
.Pp
This RunScript is designed to be executed more than once. If you run again after
a previous successful deployment, this RunScript will check if the jail that has
the service exists and if not, it will destroy the connector and remove the peer
from the VPN. It will also check if the jail that has the service has changed its
IPv4 address of the Virtual Network and if so it will update the IPv4 that the
connector uses to send packets to that jail to finally reload the
.Xr pf 4
rules.
.Pp
Nodes can be excluded using the
.Sy vpn.wg.client.exclude
label. See
.Cm add-label
for more details. Note that this label is ignored when
.Fl n
is set.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xx
.It Fl j Ar jail
.Ar vpn Ns "'s"
jail.
.Pp
The default is
.Sy littlejet-server-wg Ns "."
.It Fl n Ar node
Work only on this node.
.It Fl s Ar suffix
The
.Dq Connector
is a jail with a VPN client and needs a name. The jail name will be
.Sy <project>-<service><suffix> Ns ,
where
.Sy <suffix>
defaults to
.Sy -wg Ns "."
.It Fl v Ar virtual-network
AppJail virtual network created by
.Xr appjail-network 1 Ns "."
By default, this is undefined, so
.Xr appjail-quick 1
will use the
.Sy AUTO_*
network parameters to create one if it doesn't exist.
.El
.It Cm vpn.wg.client.destroy Oo Fl j Ar jail Oc Oo Fl n Ar node Oc Oo Fl s Ar suffix Oc Ar vpn
Destroy all already deployed connectors. This also requires the VPN server to be
deployed for this RunScript to remove the association between the connectors and
the peers.
.Pp
The
.Sy vpn.wg.client.exclude
node label can be used to ignore the given node, but note that this is ignored when
.Fl n
is set.
.It Cm vpn.wg.server Oo Fl E Oc Oo Fl j Ar jail-name Oc Oo Fl p Ar port Oc Oo Fl n Ar network Oc Oo Fl m Ar mtu Oc Oo Fl P Ar seconds Oc Oo Fl v Ar virtual-network Oc Fl e Ar endpoint Ar node
.Pp
Create a VPN server on
.Ar node Ns "."
.Pp
See also
.Lk https://github.com/DtxdF/LittleJet-wg-makejail "VPN server, VPN client and Load balancer"
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xx
.It Fl E
By default, the port will be exposed unless this flag is set.
.It Fl j Ar jail-name
Jail name where the VPN server will be.
.Pp
The default is
.Sy littlejet-server-wg Ns "."
.It Fl p Ar port
VPN server port. By default is
.Sy 51820 Ns "."
.It Fl n Ar network
VPN address.
.It Fl m Ar mtu
See
.Sy MTU
in
.Xr wg-quick 8 Ns "."
.It Fl P Ar seconds
See
.Sy PersistentKeepalive
in
.Xr wg 8 Ns "."
.It Fl v Ar virtual-network
AppJail virtual network created by
.Xr appjail-network 1 Ns "."
By default, this is undefined, so
.Xr appjail-quick 1
will use the
.Sy AUTO_*
network parameters to create one if it doesn't exist.
.It Fl e Ar endpoint
IP address of the VPN node.
.Pp
Note that deploying the VPN server, connectors, and/or load balancer on the same
node will not work if you use the external IP address of the VPN node.
.Pp
See
.Lk https://www.openbsd.org/faq/pf/rdr.html#reflect "Redirection and Reflection"
.El
.It Cm vpn.wg.server.destroy Oo Fl j Ar jail-name Oc Ar node
Destroy the VPN jail
.Ar jail-name Ns ,
which by default is
.Sy littlejet-server-wg Ns ,
on node
.Ar node Ns "."
.Pp
If you want to destroy all the load balancers, connectors and the VPN server, you
must run the corresponding RunScripts in that order.
.It Cm vpn.wg.load-balancer.pen Oo Fl eHhrsWP Oc Oo Fl b Ar seconds Oc Oo Fl c Ar number Oc Oo Fl J Ar jail Oc Oo Fl m Ar number Oc Oo Fl n Ar node Oc Oo Fl p Ar port Oc Oo Fl S Ar suffix Oc Oo Fl T Ar seconds Oc Oo Fl t Ar seconds Oc Oo Fl q Ar backlog Oc Oo Fl v Ar virtual-network Oc Oo Fl x Ar number Oc Ar vpn Ar node
Create a jail with a load balancer that also provides failover and a VPN client
that connects to the VPN server
.Ar vpn
for each service that wants to load balance on
.Ar node Ns "."
.Pp
Jails that want to load balance must have the
.Sy vpn.wg.load-balancer.pen.include.me
label and at least
.Sy vpn.wg.client.from.port
configured.
.Sy vpn.wg.client.client.proto
will be used if set.
.Pp
There are other node labels that are more useful depending on the load balancing
algorithm you choose.
.Sy vpn.wg.load-balancer.pen.max Ns ,
.Sy vpn.wg.load-balancer.pen.hard Ns ,
.Sy vpn.wg.load-balancer.pen.weight
and
.Sy vpn.wg.load-balancer.pen.prio Ns "."
See
.Sy server
in
.Xr penctl 1
for more details.
.Pp
Nodes can be excluded using the
.Sy vpn.wg.load-balancer.pen.exclude
label. See
.Cm add-label
for more details. Note that this label is ignored when
.Fl n
is set.
.Pp
Remember that
.Xr pen 1
is an L4 load balancer, so if all nodes are dead or the service is not provided
on any node, the client will see empty replies or just errors.
.Pp
This RunScript is designed to be executed more than once. If run after a successful
deployment, it will update the current list of servers to include more, the same,
or fewer nodes than the previous deployment, but note that this list is updated
dynamically and if you restart
.Xr pen 1
or the jail that once you have it, it will start with the server list you started
with the first time. Since the process will be repeated, the list will be up-to-date.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xx
.It Fl e
Expose the service provided by the load balancer.
.Pp
For each load balancer created and when the
.Fl e
flag is set, the port is incremented, so for example, if there are two services
to load balance and the initial port is
.Sy 1234 Ns ,
then the first load balancer will use
.Sy 1234
and the second
.Sy 1235 Ns "."
.It Fl H
See
.Fl H
in
.Xr penctl 1 Ns "."
.It Fl h
See
.Fl h
in
.Xr pen 1 Ns "."
.It Fl r
See
.Fl r
in
.Xr pen 1 Ns "."
.It Fl s
See
.Fl s
in
.Xr pen 1 Ns "."
.It Fl W
See
.Fl W
in
.Xr pen 1 Ns "."
.It Fl P
See
.Sy prio
in
.Xr penctl 1 Ns "."
.It Fl b Ar seconds
See
.Fl b
in
.Xr pen 1 Ns "."
.Pp
The default is
.Sy 6 Ns "."
.It Fl c Ar number
See
.Fl c
in
.Xr pen 1 Ns "."
.Pp
The default is
.Sy 2048 Ns "."
.It Fl J Ar jail
.Ar vpn Ns "'s"
jail.
.Pp
The default is
.Sy littlejet-server-wg Ns "."
.It Fl m Ar number
See
.Fl m
in
.Xr pen 1 Ns "."
.Pp
The default is
.Sy 256 Ns "."
.It Fl n Ar node
Work only on this node.
.It Fl p Ar port
Listening port.
.Pp
The default is
.Sy 1234 Ns "."
.It Fl S Ar suffix
The load balancer is a jail that needs a name. The jail name will be
.Sy <project>-<service><suffix> Ns ,
where
.Sy <suffix>
defaults to
.Sy -lb Ns "."
.It Fl T Ar seconds
See
.Fl T
in
.Xr pen 1 Ns "."
.Pp
The default is
.Sy 6 Ns "."
.It Fl t Ar seconds
See
.Fl t
in
.Xr pen 1 Ns "."
.Pp
The default is
.Sy 10 Ns "."
.It Fl q Ar backlog
See
.Fl q
in
.Xr pen 1 Ns "."
.Pp
The default is
.Sy 500 Ns "."
.It Fl v Ar virtual-network
AppJail virtual network created by
.Xr appjail-network 1 Ns "."
By default, this is undefined, so
.Xr appjail-quick 1
will use the
.Sy AUTO_*
network parameters to create one if it doesn't exist.
.It Fl x Ar number
See
.Fl x
in
.Xr pen 1 Ns "."
.Pp
The default is
.Sy 500 Ns "."
.El
.It Cm vpn.wg.load-balancer.pen.destroy Oo Fl J Ar jail Oc Oo Fl n Ar node Oc Oo Fl S Ar suffix Oc Ar vpn Ar node
Destroy all already deployed load-balancers. This also requires the VPN server to
be deployed for this RunScript to remove the association between the load-balancers
and the peers.
.Pp
The
.Sy vpn.wg.load-balancer.pen.exclude
node label can be used to ignore the given node, but note that this is ignored when
.Fl n
is set.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width xxxx
.It Pa ~/.config/littlejet/config.conf
See
.Xr littlejet.conf 5 Ns "."
.It Pa %%PREFIX%%/share/littlejet/files/lib.subr
Subroutines primarily used by RunScripts.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr appjail 1
.Xr sysexits 3
.Xr littlejet.conf 5
.Lk https://github.com/DtxdF/director "AppJail Director"
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo Aq Mt DtxdF@disroot.org
