.\"Copyright (c) 2024, Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo <DtxdF@disroot.org>
.\"All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\"modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\"* Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
.\"  list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\"* Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
.\"  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
.\"  and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"* Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its
.\"  contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"  this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\"THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\"AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\"IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\"DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\"FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\"DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\"SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\"CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\"OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\"OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd July 2, 2024
.Dt LITTLEJET.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ~/.config/littlejet/config.conf
.Nd Configuration parameters for LittleJet
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Xr littlejet 1
utility uses some defaults that are safe for most environments, but you can change
any parameters described below to adapt it to your needs.
.Nm
is a file that contains the parameters that control the operation of
.Xr littlejet 1 "."
Note that this file is an
.Xr sh 1
script.
.Sh PATH PARAMETERS
.Bl -tag -width xxxxx
.It PREFIX
Root prefix used by other directories.
.Pp
Default:
.Em %%PREFIX%%
.Sh SYSTEM DIRECTORIES PARAMETERS
.Bl -tag -width xxxxx
.It SHAREDIR
Location of shared files.
.Pp
Default:
.Em ${PREFIX}/share/littlejet
.It FILESDIR
Location of files used by LittleJet.
.Pp
Default:
.Em ${SHAREDIR}/files
.It DATADIR
Location of files generated by LittleJet.
.Pp
This is currently not used except as a shortcut for other parameters. See
.Sy LITTLEJETDIR
which does perform this function.
.Pp
Default:
.Em ${PREFIX}/littlejet
.It LIB_SUBR
Subroutines primarily used by RunScripts.
.Pp
Default:
.Em ${FILESDIR}/lib.subr
.El
.Sh USER DIRECTORIES PARAMETERS
.Bl -tag -width xxxxx
.It LITTLEJETDIR
Location of files generated by LittleJet.
.Pp
Default:
.Em ${HOMEDIR}/.littlejet
.It PROJECTSDIR
Location of projects.
.Pp
Default:
.Em ${LITTLEJETDIR}/projects
.It RUNSCRIPTS
Space-separated list of directories where RunScripts are located.
.Pp
Note that this works similarly to the
.Ev PATH
environment variable, where the first match wins. This is very useful when you
want to use your own RunScript that has the same name as the one shipped by
LittleJet. Of course, this is a double-edged sword: if you have scripts that
depend on specific parameters or some specific behavior that your RunScript
doesn't provide, those scripts can and probably will fail.
.Pp
Default:
.Em ${LITTLEJETDIR}/runscripts ${SHAREDIR}/runscripts
.It SOCKETSDIR
Location of SSH sockets when multiplexing.
.Pp
Default:
.Em ${LITTLEJETDIR}/sockets
.It NODESDIR
Location of nodes.
.Pp
Default:
.Em ${LITTLEJETDIR}/nodes
.El
.Sh SSH-RELATED PARAMETERS
.Bl -tag -width xxxxx
.It CONTROLPATH
See
.Sy ControlPath
in
.Xr ssh_config 5 Ns "."
.Pp
Default:
.Em %r.%h.%p
.It CONTROLPERSIST
See
.Sy ControlPersist
in
.Xr ssh_config 5 Ns "."
.Pp
Default:
.Em 8m
.It CPIGNORE
Exclusion file used by
.Xr cpdup 1 Ns "."
.Pp
Default:
.Em ${FILESDIR}/cpignore
.El
.Sh LOGGING PARAMETERS
.Bl -tag -width xxxxx
.It DEBUG
Enable debug level.
.Pp
Default:
.Em NO
.It SSH_LOGLEVEL
See
.Sy LogLevel
in
.Xr ssh_config 5 Ns "."
.Pp
Default:
.Em ERROR
.El
.Sh REMOTE PARAMETERS
.Bl -tag -width xxxxx
.It REMOTE_DATADIR
Location of files generated by LittleJet on the remote system.
.Pp
Default:
.Em ${DATADIR}
.It REMOTE_PROJECTSDIR
Location of projects that are uploaded by LittleJet to the remote system.
.Pp
Default:
.Em ${REMOTE_DATADIR}/projects
.El
.Sh MULTI-PROCESSING PARAMETERS
.Bl -tag -width xxxxx
.It NCPU
Maximum number of jobs running at the same time.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cpdup 1
.Xr littlejet 1
.Xr ssh_config 5
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jesús Daniel Colmenares Oviedo Aq Mt DtxdF@disroot.org
